hi everyone I'm back Laszlo Montgomery
here with another episode in our shallow
but generally satisfying dive into the
history of Shinyoung episode 251 this
time she's young history part 8 lots of
interesting stuff to cover today 10th to
the 13th centuries last time we looked
at the rise and fall of the wee Gurkha
gonnit 744 to 840 after putting away
their car Luke and bas Mill allies the
wee Gers got to enjoy being the next
great power to be rulers of the eastern
Eurasian steppe joining all those others
who came before and after them to lord
it over this part of Asia though it had
never been part of China these lands to
the north since the earliest days of
recorded Chinese history had so much
impact on many of the events of northern
China but like everyone before them
going back to the show knew the we Gers
to fell to a greater power
the ancient care Gea's from lands even
beyond northwestern Mongolia along the
Yenisei River after decades of trying
they conquered the Weger and forced them
south and west from their traditional
Mongolian homeland and these Yenisei
Kyrgyz became the next great power of
the Mongolian steppe but not the last so
let's focus on the Uighur diaspora sent
packing from their ancestral homeland I
mentioned in closing last time some of
these we Gers ended up in Gansu summon
Shin Jung and summon Ching hai our focus
will be on the ones who ended up in
Xinjiang the kocho Uighur kingdom let me
just say I used the term weekers in the
general sense even within the Uighur
people there were various clans and you
know the thing about clans those people
stick together and it was one of those
clans that ended up in Gansu and in
gansu province they got themselves
settled and established a political
organization right in the middle of the
hood she organ su corridor a front door
to Shin Jung from the China side the
Weger kingdom in Gansu was called the
gancho Weger kingdom gancho is located
in pres
de Chong yet historic gansu province I
read Kublai Khan was born at Jong yeah
this group of we Gers establish their
own Kingdom in 894 that lasted clear
through to 1036 but when this branch of
the Uighur diaspora arrived in gansu
province someone was already there let
me quickly mention them first their
story is related to the fall of the
tongue the tongue dynasty finally up and
died in 907 they had been mostly gone
from Xin Jiang since even before 790
their bete noire the tibetan empire had
been too great a foe for the tongue
throughout the seventh eighth and ninth
centuries but just as the wee Gurkha GaN
it was starting to crumble mid 9th
century it was also the beginning of the
end of the Tibetan empires they too fell
victim to the same old thing that
brought down many an empire dynasty and
political party namely succession
problems yes the tibetan empire was
starting to top off they were completely
pushed out of the hood she corridor in
gansu province by chinese troops based
in what was then called shacho or sha
prefecture
this is present-day Dunhuang in this
land and the Gansu corridor that had
belonged to tibet was seized back and
put under Tong dynasty control this was
in the seven 80s and the one who led
this victorious army was named Johnny
Chou for all his achievements in putting
this crucial territory back under the
Chinese flag he was given military rank
and honors by the Tong shinsung Emperor
that effectively turned him into the
military governor of this region in the
hood corridor and this area became known
as the quay east circuit Arg wayy June
and the dates of this Quay e tun are 848
to 1036 and although within the quay
June there was some infighting that saw
different families controlling the
politics this entity remained loyal to
the Chinese Empire first under the
tongue and later under the song the
gancho Weger kingdom dates are 894 to
hmm
same ending date as the quay east
circuit and beginning around nine ten to
nine sixteen these gonzo we Gore's
rested away part of these lands
controlled by the quay east circuit
incheon yet and then they went and
formed their own weaker gancho kingdom
the gonzo we Gers were friendly with
these other power centers in north china
they maintained very good relations with
the song court the guei ii circuit and
the gonzo Weger kingdom both ended up
getting swallowed up in the same year by
the same entity these were the Tonga
tribes who found at the Western Shah
dynasty ten thirty eight to twelve
twenty seven the targets were people who
came from around the Tibetan Plateau and
their dynasty the Western Shah well it
ran concurrently with in northern song
and Liao dynasties and was centered
around Xiang XI Ningxia and Gansu
running west all the way to the Jade
Gate the human where China proper
unofficially ended Chinggis Khaan will
end up dying in his battles to conquer
this Western Asia the gonzo we Gers
after meeting their end against the
Western Shah did what everyone else did
going all the way back to the shown new
they assembled is one single horde and
migrated to land stretching from
Dunhuang in the north to northern Ching
hai in the south as well as parts of the
southern Terran Basin and these people
became known as the so called Yellowhead
weigert the huang tohe or hue who they
weren't of warlike people and pretty
much minded their own business practice
Buddhism and these yellow head we Gers
are thought to be today's huger ethnic
minority Yug you are not Weger they are
the you gusu one of the official 56
there's about 15,000 or so who claim
that ethnicity and their ID cards mostly
living in and around Chang yeah in Gansu
so with the gray II circuit and gonzo
Weger kingdom out of the way let's look
the kocho Uighur kingdom the Weger of
this kingdom were pretty important
because they were the ones who settled
in Xinjiang and called the place home
for the next thousand years or so so
this group from the Weger diaspora
pushed out of their Mongolian homeland
by the Yenisei carries the greatest
number of them ended up in Xinjiang
first to besh Malik or baiting as we've
called it before which acted as the
winter capital of their Kingdom and also
to the south and kocho which as I said
we've also known as kao chung and
karakasa
among other names the we Gers were
fortunate in that well as I said the
Tibetans who had controlled these lands
for the past hundred years were already
having a steep decline in their fortunes
as an empire this made the Weger
takeover of the Turpin and North tyreme
basins that much easier
this new Weger kocho kingdom stretched
from about ha me in the Turpin Basin to
Kucha in the West some 700 miles away
mostly all of the northern Thai rim
basin and when these wee girls who
thanks to their former keg on burgoo you
know mainly followed the faith of mana
key ism well when they arrived in
Xinjiang the place was still
overwhelmingly Buddhist and after a
while much to forego Kagan's chagrin had
he lived to see it the Weger of kocho
began to transition from mana key ism to
Buddhism beginning in the 9th and 10th
centuries so the coach oh we goes they
built themselves quite a magical kingdom
up in the northern portion of the Tarim
basin
it was multi-ethnic rich diverse and a
land of many faiths all of which man
seemed to tolerate the other though
Islam was not part of this mix yet this
land where the kocho kingdom lay is also
referred to historically as we giris tan
and these wee girls at this age are
sometimes referred to as the medieval
weekers the coach or eager Kingdom
lasted for quite a long time all the way
to 11:30
at which time they fell under the yoke
of the carrick hit I will get to them
and good time is Stan that's a Persian
word that means land there's seven
countries all in Central Asia whose
name's end in Stan or Astana
so we Gura Stan the leaguers land or the
land of the we Gore's
something of note from the early song
that's worth mentioning in 1981 or 1982
by order of the song tight song Emperor
brother to the founder Chou Quan Yin
well like other Emperor's had done
before him most famously perhaps Han
wildy with John Chen well he also sent
an envoy to the west to explore
relations with the kingdoms out that way
and this is the story of one yonder he
lived from 939 to 1006 by 984 Wong yen
de made it to the Turpin Basin to the
kocho Kingdom and he had this to say
about the place and I'm quoting from
James mill words great book which I
strongly recommend for further reading
on this subject Eurasian crossroads
quote there is no rain or snow here and
it is extremely hot each year at the
hottest time the inhabitants dig holes
on the ground to live in the earth
produces all five grains except
buckwheat the nobility eat horse flesh
while the rest eat mutton wild ducks and
geese their music is played on the PIPA
and the harp they produce Sables fine
white cotton cloth and an embroidered
cloth made from flour stamens by custom
they enjoy horseback riding and archery
they use the tongue calendar they
fashion pipes of silver or brass and
channel flowing water to shoot at each
other or they sprinkle water on each
other as a game which they call pressing
out the sun's heat to chase off sickness
they like to take walks and the
strollers always carry a musical
instrument with them there are over 50
Buddhist temples here the names
inscribed over the gates all presented
by the Tang court and spring nights the
locals past the time milling about
between the temples in this land there
are no poor people and
when short of food is given public aid
people live to an advanced age generally
over 100 years no one dies young end
quote
except for the lack of buckwheat doesn't
sound like such a bad place these wee
Gers who made their new home in Xin
Jiang well over time they mingled and
married with the shinjang local people
of various backgrounds sogdian Chinese
Indian other Turkic people Tibetans and
other indo-european people who had
populated these lands since 2000 BCE and
not only the physical characteristics of
the inhabitants were combined the
different cultures and many linguistic
elements as well impacted what this
place ultimately became and over a
millennium what evolved are the Weger
people that you see today and I can't
speak for all of them but most Weger
inhabitants of Xin Jiang today got there
as a result of this great diaspora that
followed in the wake of the fall of the
we Gurkha gannets in 840 regardless of
the purity of Weger strands and the
people who lived in the Coach o Kingdom
they all shared one single Weger
political identity there's quite a lot
that has been preserved that shows this
place was among the great literary and
scholarly regions of the day the
indo-iranian script became a literary
vehicle for the Turkic spoken Weger
language to express itself even more
eloquently the Weger buddhists who
thrived here during the 10th and 11th
century and it left behind a lot of
writings again all in that Sogdian
script they had adopted these were a
much more refined and scholarly group of
we Gers than what had once populated
their Mongolian homeland in the middle
Evans century came two of the more
renowned literary figures of the kocho
Kingdom period
these were yusuf kisaki and Mahmud al
Kashgari if you have a 1000 Kyrgyz psalm
note in your wallet
that's Yosef haha Jeebs face you see he
wrote a work called the wisdom that
brings happiness
a beautifully written work that provides
a very detailed window into the society
he lived in which in the 10 50s was the
Kyra Condit connet that we're gonna look
at in a bit mahmoud al Kashgari he too
lived during the kara coned connot and
as his name suggests he came from
kashgar he was another giant literary
figure from his time he's most renowned
for his work
a dictionary of Turkic languages that
has offered scholars insight into so
much of the literary works including
Turkic poetry and like the other
surviving works of this time it offers
precious insight into what was happening
in the carrick on it can--it historians
will offer the context and the
chronologies but it was the literary
people of these times who filled in so
many blanks as far as what a place was
actually like a historian will tell you
a place existed the poet adds the human
element to the structure so Yosef kesaji
and mahmoud al Kashgari were two of the
more important literary figures from
this time at the same time that the
kocho Weger kingdom was thriving in the
north of Xinjiang northern Tarim basin
and turpan basin a new power arrived on
the scene these were the kurakin it's
this group traced their most recent
history to the car Luke's the car Luke's
or another Turkic tribe remember the car
Luke's were occasional military allies
of the Tong dynasty and were called upon
from time to time to do the bidding of
the Tong Emperor but at the Battle of
Telos 751 it was these very same car
Luke's who switch sides on Gaussian
chair and forced the Tong army to go
down in defeat against the Arabs and
flee to lands west of Xin Jiang the car
looks had also once been one third of
the Alliance that teamed up with the
Weger to overthrow the eastern Turkic
agon it
but alliances in that part of the world
were never terribly long-lasting and the
car Luke's got chased out of those
Mongolian lands and ended up in western
Xinjiang and also an Eastern Kyrgyzstan
they're these car Luc's and other turkic
tribes they made alliances with along
the way set up their political state
that we know as the Carrick on 'add
connot after playing a role in the
defeat of the western turcica gonnit
they established their capital at Sioux
yob the Chinese sway yet where the
tongue Protectorate once was relocated
for a while after tell us and when the
carrot Condit's arrived in and around
transoxiana there were many contenders
already fighting amongst themselves for
control of these lands made so rich over
the centuries by the ever-expanding
volume of trade between east and west
and with so many players from near and
far
while alliances were always made between
the stronger and weaker powers of
Central Asia and the car Luke's led the
way in the establishment of the kurakin
at connot the dates of the kara cannons
was 842 1212 if that year 840 rang a
familiar Bell that was also the same
year of the fall of the we Gurkha gonnit
again the car Luke's and the we girls
were both ethnically Turkic compared to
their relative importance and impact on
the history of Central Asia the Kyra
Condit Condit doesn't get the attention
it deserves they had a very major role
in the spread of Islam throughout the
region including in Xinjiang which I
guess you could say exerted a huge
influence on the events that followed
into our modern day how the one-time
Buddhist Kara qanats embraced Islam
requires the telling of the story of the
10th century Kara Condit prince sultan
satu boug rekon although of the kurakin
it's he was not a car Luke Turk he came
from a different tribe who had joined
with the car looks to assist in the
founding of the connet he came from just
a little north of kashgar when he was
young his stepfather the Khan was
tolerant of Muslims and they roamed
where they pleased the Khan even allowed
them to build a mosque and
- Sh next city north of Koshka during
this time of suck bugarach on the
persian samanid empire was in full swing
that ran from 819 to 999 and these
samanids were a major group of muslims
who you had a good chance of running
into this far east into central asia the
samanids were later conquered by the
kara cards and satu bugarach on when he
became the ruler of this connot he
converted to Islam in 934 that was the
milestone year for the establishment of
Islam as the predominant faith of this
massive part of the world
satu boo grokken then went on to allow
Islam to be introduced throughout the
connot and in fact was a benefactor of
the religion and thanks to him we
remember the kurakin it can--it as not
only the first Turkic Islamic empire in
Central Asia
it was the kara connard's who for the
first time took traditional turkey
culture and merged it with Islam and as
you'll see Islam took Central Asia by
storm and where there were once Buddhist
centers and a proliferation of temples
over the 10th and 11th centuries they
faded in importance and in the numbers
of faithful in the Buddhist temples made
way for mosques and what we see today
all came from this time in history
believe me there are plenty of differing
stories about how abdul karim sat took
boug rekon converted to islam one of
these stories suggests he was strongly
affected by seeing the muslim faithful
as i said probably semana de personnes
at prayer and at the age of 12 against
his stepfather the khan's wishes he
converted to islam and after satu
kubrick on killed his stepfather for his
hard line against his practice of islam
he became the new khan of the Karaka
notes and as I said gave Islam its very
own great leap forward in this part of
the world and if you go to our toosh
next town north of kashgar today you can
visit the tomb of Satsuki bugarach on
not a very well-known name in the West
but had quite a big impact on world
history particularly in Central Asia the
car accounted armies at the end of the
10th and early 11th centuries began to
take over the southern kingdoms of the
towering basin most notably the kingdom
of Catan the rich and prosperous land
also known as utn and today called hood
TN it was one of the greatest and
longest lasting buddhist centers within
a thousand miles unlike on the opposite
side of the towering basin these Haute
Anees and the kingdoms east and west of
them had always been more ironic
culturally and linguistically the
kingdom they created in the year 56 ran
for 950 years before their end came they
had for a while at least managed to
remain independent of both the kocho
Weger kingdom in the north and from the
kuru qanats in the west buddhist cotton
and muslim kara canid fought a long war
but in 1006 it was all over for this
one-time commercial cultural and
Buddhist paradise and with the takeover
of Croton what followed was a quick
introduction of Islam to this Buddhist
land eventually turning it into what you
see in modern times as far back is when
Marco Polo passed through in the early
12 70s he noted Houghton was already a
Muslim land early 11th century the kara
Condit qanats began to fall apart
since the 1040s their empire had already
been divided up and east and west no one
in the family can get along same old
story
the Kahn it had already peaked by then
at the dawn of the twelve hundreds there
were four powers in Central Asia
jostling each other for political
control over their respective lands
between the Western and Eastern kara
connard's there were also the seljuq
turks the Caribbean dynasty and the
kuraki Thai coming right up in the end
the eastern Cairo connard's in 1211 were
done in by the Karaka Thai and then two
years later the
Western Carrick on it can--it was
defeated by an alliance led by the
Caribbean dynasty the familiar 13th
century the twelve hundreds the Mongols
century well pretty soon they're gonna
put everyone out of business and all
lands we've been talking about directly
and indirectly in Asia will belong to
them and monumental software changes
will start to happen in every corner of
the continent so the carrick haunted
connet these were mostly car Luke Turks
and their subjects you know maybe we
don't think of them as much as we ought
to their achievements between 840 and
1212 acted as the catalyst in their day
that blended the Turkic nomadic aspect
of who they originally were with the
Islamic faith that they embraced in 934
with satu Boog rekon along with the
culture of these long-established Oasis
states that have been around since the
earliest days of the Silk Road this car
accounted connet give a nice bump to
this wave of momentum that saw not only
the Islamization of the towering Basin
but the turkish ization as well what
followed their time on the historical
stage among other things was that in
Xinjiang at least the people became
heavily Turkic and their makeup and well
this is also when Buddhism that had once
so dominated the entire Asian continent
gradually vanished from the basins
replaced instead with Islam the carica
tie were the next great power to
dominate Eastern Eurasia including Xin
Jiang easy to get them mixed up with the
korrok on 'add not the same the Karaka
tie were not Turkic people they were
Catan or cheat on from lands and Eastern
Mongolia parts of Siberia and northern
Manchuria they spoke in Altai ik
language their own called the coton
language if you recall we looked at the
Keaton's back in an old CHP episode
number 126 this was the story of the
founder of the great liao dynasty yelu
the yelu clan were the dominant
clan amongst the
Catan people and after the kittens had
become a great power in the north
well that's when yelu pouchy formed the
liao dynasty that ran from the fall of
the tongue 916 to 1125 during that time
they were the greatest power in northern
China and Manchuria as well as parts of
Mongolia they were permanently defeated
by the Jurchens of the Jean dynasty the
very same ones who also in 1125 snuffed
out the northern song and sent Emperor
Wade song and his whole imperial family
marching on a one-way trip north to some
of the coldest parts of Heilong Jiang to
live out the rest of their lives and
this was after the song had helped the
Jean rulers get rid of the kittens the
song for all their assistance soon after
it got theirs from the Jean and these
defeated Keaton's were forced to migrate
out of their conquered lands and of
those kittens who carried out this
exodus from their Mongolian steppe lands
northeast of China were the people who
became the kuraki Thai who famously gave
us the word cafe one of the old names
for China used by many nations and the
successor state that they built was also
known as the Western liao the leader who
led them from their ancestral homeland
to the new promised land out in Xinjiang
transoxiana and later beyond those lands
was the last liao dynasty emperor
deadzone also known as yelu tosher and
after a hard rubbing by the church in
Jin yeah lute Asher and his Keaton
followers beat a retreat to the west and
created a new destiny out in those parts
yelu dahshur led his Keaton followers
from their conquered homeland in the
direction of Xin Jiang and wherever they
passed along the way they gathered
followers not necessarily Keaton and
they grew in size and when they came
upon the kocho Weger kingdom they were
welcomed and accepted as the suzerain of
this Weger kingdom these carica ty were
quite a warlike people and had battled
their way all the way west to the
Huracan it can--it and they put an end
to the Eastern Carrick on its at 11:34
three years later in 1137 the Carrick it
I finished up their conquest of the
lands in present-day shinjang Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan Tajikistan and Uzbekistan and
the empire built by the Carrick it I
like everyone else in harm's way lasted
till the time of the Mongol conquest the
Kyra khatai themselves did little to
assimilate with their new conquered
lands they wrapped themselves up and all
the traditional Katan trappings that
they brought with them western liao
royalty drew heavily on the inspiration
of the katana Leo and from China as well
you know think what they might of their
sedentary Chinese southern neighbors
most of these northern nomadic tribes
kingdoms and cagin 'it's love to spiff
up their dynasty with the occasional
Chinese title or symbol of authority so
there was plenty going on right now
contemporary with the carica ty where
the Western Shah the Jurchen Qin Dynasty
the southern song and the Dali Kingdom
going on in Yunnan China was by no means
even close to being United
it's gonna take the Mongols to take care
of that during the Yuan Dynasty
after bringing the carotenoid kana to an
end the corocut I ruled their empire
from one of their five power centers
bilasa gone east of Bishkek and
present-day kyrgyzstan this had been the
capital of the eastern kara connard's
before they moved it to Koshka all the
vassals who once bowed to the Carrack on
aids now belong to the Karaka tai
including the kocho Weger kingdom the
carotenoids after becoming vassals of
the karoke tie made themselves useful in
helping to control and manage the muslim
portions of the Empire the carica tie
were predominantly Buddhist but
maintained good relations with their
care Akana Muslim subjects the Western
liao these carica tie they were
notoriously hands-off Susan's the coach
a wee girl
eight even after becoming subjects of
the caricature remains rather
independent as long as the tribute
flowed and the obeisance was paid the
Weger sup in coach oh we're left alone
to do their thing it was like this with
all of acyl states they all enjoyed a
similar degree of autonomy and these
Weger
who inhabited this kocho kingdom they
were very literate and had become the
true ears to the Sogdian talent for
administration and management not to
mention in literature and in this
respect as I believe I may have
indicated in a previous episode the we
Gers ended up playing a very significant
role in the mongol empire the Karaka tai
now they lasted till 1218 that's when
Chinggis Khaan put them away they had
tried and failed to retake lands that
they had lost to the church in Jean
dynasty in 1209 these Weger of the kocho
kingdom led by their into coots what
they called their cons well he rose up
against their carica Thai overlords
decapitated their leader and ended up
upgrading their loyalties to the mongols
becoming vassals to Chinggis Khaan and
this Weger it accout name bar choked for
his loyalty to the great khan he
received in 1211 the hand in marriage of
one of the Khans daughters and was also
given further honors by being called the
fifth son of Chinggis Khaan you all know
the great khans for well known sons from
his loyal wife bert a jo qi chugga tie
her g'day and Tolui
the Weger it accoutns bar chook who
swore fealty to Chinggis Khaan so early
in the game and he was given great
honors bart shook went on to fight with
Chinggis Khaan deep into central asia
and was with them fighting against the
tang goats of the western shah exacting
Weger revenge for the defeat of the
Weger ganzo kingdom and Gansu this was
the campaign at 12:27 which Chinggis
Khaan perished in the city of incheon
modern-day capital of Ningxia province
after the Mongol conquest we don't hear
much from the kyra khatai and they just
melted into the Central Asian Pot
Chinese historiography from this time
considered the Western liao dynasty to
be legit I mean the story of the
caricature was included as one of the 24
officially sanctioned histories the
archer sister this story is contained in
the liao sure written during the un
dynasty well I mentioned him already
several times so you know the next big
thing to happen in Xinjiang history and
Asian and European history I guess he
could say to was the rise and fall of
the Mongol Empire things will never be
the same after that I mentioned jingis
khan's four sons won't
12:27 when Chinggis Khaan died his four
sons took over control of the Empire the
first Empire that geographically
contained the entirety of the Silk Road
all under one umbrella at last of the
four khan it's created the one we're
concerned with is the one handed over to
the number-two son of Chinggis Khaan and
this was chugga tie these lands of the
chagatai khanate included most of
Central Asia and parts of northern Iran
or basically everything that had once
belonged to the carica tie their capital
was located in Xinjiang in the
present-day city of Eden located in the
Ely Valley not too far from the Xin
Jiang Kazakhstan border and rather than
get things started with the chugga tides
of the chug attack on it let's call it a
day and bring the curtain down right
here okay
several listeners have told me I need to
put this announcement to sign up to
support the show at the beginning of the
episode I don't know I really don't want
to give you the hard sell $3 a month is
all I'm asking but many of you have
signed up for five and ten dollars a
month so they had appreciation or what
patreon.com slash China history podcast
that's all you need to look for you can
also just do a one-time donation and be
rid of me all you have to do is go to
paypal.com is true
cast throw a few carries some and my
online begging ball and I'll be most
thankful it's the thought that counts
thanks everyone who's been so kind and
generous with the donations okay one
last thing if you haven't listened to
all seven episodes of the special
10-year anniversary program I produced
in between part 7 and this part 8
episode go check it out some of the best
stuff to come out of me this month it
looks at the history of us-china
relations between 1969 to 1972
culminating in the royal visit in 1972
of our 36th President Richard Milhous
Nixon quite a controversial character in
his day
go binge on that over two hours of me
your humble narrator you know I have a
website tea cup dot media all the links
to patreon PayPal every CHP show I ever
did all 30 episodes of the Chinese
sayings podcast from 2016 2017 it's all
there
you know Cathay Pacific still carries a
bunch of those Chinese sayings shows in
their in-flight entertainment system I
am drowning in royalty checks
everything's there plus all the links
and terms from each episode in pinyin
Chinese and English tea cup dot media
okay take care of me little beauties
keep your friends close and your masks
and gloves closer we're still not out of
the woods yet
this is Lazlo Montgomery signing off
from the city that made SoCal famous Los
Angeles you've already come this far so
you might as well join me next time for
another exciting episode of the China
history podcast